In the southern states of the USA, racial segregation was common from the late 19th century into the 1960s. Laws were passed to keep blacks from voting – for example, by imposing taxes and literacy requirements. Even violence, e.g. lynching or hangings committed by mobs, was common. Blacks and whites were separated in schools, parks, trains, hospitals and other public places. In the 1950s, the Civil Rights Movement gained strength and achieved a break-through in equal rights legislation for blacks. Lawyers for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) pressed a series of important cases before the Supreme Court which culminated in the landmark decision in Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (May 17,1954), in which separate educational facilities were declared unconstitutional. This decision stimulated a mass-movement to try to end the segregationist practices across the nation, particularly in the South. Martin Luther King formed a resistance movement, led by his Southern Christian Leadership Conferences (SCLC). From 1955 to 1960 some progress was made toward integrating schools and other public facilities in the upper South and the border states. One of the most famous incidents happened in 1955 in Montgomery, Alabama, when Rosa Parks refused to stand up and give her seat to a white man on the bus, which was required at that time. She was arrested and taken to jail. News of her arrest sparked a boycott of the city’s buses that lasted over a year. In 1956, the Supreme Court declared bus segregation unconstitutional, making Rosa Parks a national hero.
Following the non-violent methods of Mohandas Gandhi, the Civil Rights Movement spread across the nation, forcing the desegregation of department stores, supermarkets, libraries and cinemas. The movement reached its climax in August 1963 with a massive march on Washington, D.C. , to protest at racial discrimination and demonstrate support for major civil rights legislation that was pending in Congress. In 1964 Congress passed the civil rights act, the most far-reaching civil rights bill in the nation’s history, forbidding discrimination in public accommodations. It was followed in 1965 by the passage of the Voting Rights Act, which led to drastic increases in the numbers of registered black voters, which a resulting increase in the numbers of blacks holding elective offices.
In the years that followed, the following milestones marked the slow progress of African Americans to gain equal rights and opportunities:
In 1967 the first black mayors of major cities were elected, in 1988 Jesse Jackson was the first black with a serious chance of being chosen as a candidate for presidency, in 1989 David N. Dinkins became mayor of New York, and three years later Carol Moseley-Braun became the first black woman to be elected to the US senate. In 1933 Toni Morrison was the first African American to win the Nobel Prize for Literature and in 2000 Colin Powell, who had been the first black officer to hold the highest military post in the United States, was appointed Foreign Minister in President Bush’s Cabinet.
Today the percentage of African Americans comprises 13% of the total population. In 2000, the state with the largest percentage of African Americans in its population was Washington D.C. (61%), followed by Mississippi (37%), Louisiana (32%), South Carolina (30%) and Georgia (29%). When looking at absolute numbers, the five states with the largest African American populations were New York (3.2 million), California (2.5 million), Texas (2.5 million, Florida (2.3 million) and Georgia (2.2.million).
According to a survey carried out by the National Urban League in 2001, the most important problems that Blacks today are facing still are discrimination and racism, economic development/unemployment and education. Asked about the state of race relations in America today, 47 % said race relations were only fair, 36% saw them as poor and only 13 % considered them good. 67% don’t think that black people are accurately portrayed on TV shows and 74% considered the criminal justice system in the United States biased against blacks. On the other hand, 50% are of the opinion that black children have a good a chance as white children to get a good education. 
Following the non-violent methods of Mohandas Gandhi, the Civil Rights Movement spread across the nation, forcing the desegregation of department stores, supermarkets, libraries and cinemas. The movement reached its climax in August 1963 with a massive march on Washington, D.C. , to protest at racial discrimination and demonstrate support for major civil rights legislation that was pending in Congress. In 1964 Congress passed the civil rights act, the most far-reaching civil rights bill in the nation’s history, forbidding discrimination in public accommodations. It was followed in 1965 by the passage of the Voting Rights Act, which led to drastic increases in the numbers of registered black voters, which a resulting increase in the numbers of blacks holding elective offices.

