Product labels, whether they set out the sugar content of food stuff, the energy use of appliances, the dangers of tobacco consumption, or the origin of fish from sustainable fisheries, provide information to consumers. They usually provide this information for a reason – because consumers request it, because governments want to induce people to save energy and smoke less, because civil society organisations have made it their task to contribute to the protection of fishstock by certifying the sustainability of fisheries. With respect to some types of labels, including ecolabels, the regulatory purpose is more evident than it is with respect to others. Yet, even ecolabels that clearly pursue a regulatory purpose are frequently depicted as ‘information tools.’ In what follows I first elaborate on the view of ecolabels as conveyors of information to consumers to then lay out the various regulatory aspects of labels, and ecolabels in particular.
Ecolabelling can be associated with a particular form of governance, namely one that attributes a political role to consumers who through their consumption decisions exercise a vote – not only about the utility of a product but potentially also about aspects of the lifecycle of a product which are not reflected in
product characteristics. Through their consumption choices consumers, as market participants, can induce transformations within the economy that reduce its harmful effects on the environment.
From a systems-theoretical perspective ‘consumer voting’ appears as a more effective way to limit the destructive tendencies of the economic system than ‘citizen-voting’ in political elections given the incapacity of the political system to directly intervene in the economic system. From a business perspective ecolabelling promises not only environmental, but also economic gains as the differentiation between more and less sustainable products which ecolabels make possible potentially opens new markets, for example if consumers of tuna products labelled ‘dolphin-safe’ buy these products not only because they care for tuna, but because they derive some extra utility from the fact that these products carry an ecolabel. Sufficient information is a prerequisite for consumers to exercise voting power on questions of sustainability through consumption. 
And choice between labelled and unlabelled products is a prerequisite for business to capitalise on preferences for ecolabels while still being able to cater to the demand for unlabelled (and therefore possibly cheaper) products.
Against this background the view of ecolabels as information tools appears as one that emphasises the power of consumers to influence the economy through their informed choices. At the same time the conception of ecolabels as creating choice through differentiation stresses the potential of ecolabels to benefit the economy by inducing growth. Ecolabels viewed this way can be understood to partake in a turn from government to governance through market-based instruments.
From a different viewpoint one may call into question the depiction of ecolabels as mere information tools and stress the power involved in labelling as well as the need for government involvement to make labelling effective. Three aspects are presented in the following which complexify the qualification of labels as information tools: first the intricate connection between the provision of information and the reasons/purposes for which information is provided, second the significance of the way in which information is presented, and third the need for reliability of and consumer trust in the information provided.
Labels cannot exhaustively inform about the characteristics of a product, the process of its production or its life-cycle. Neither would the information fit on a label, nor are consumers able or willing to process vast amounts of information prior to making their consumption decisions. Thus labels only provide selected information. The selection is motivated by the reasons for labelling. For some ecolabels it is directly linked to a regulatory purpose. Ecolabels are frequently based on certain standards concerning product characteristics, production methods or environmental impact over the life-cycle of a product. These standards may have been elaborated by governments, business, non governmental organisations (NGOs) or so-called multistakeholder initiatives. Labels are used to certify and signal to the consumer that the labelled product complies with these standards. Examples are the US ‘dolphin-safe’ label (discussed below), the Marine Stewardship Council’s or the Friend of the Sea’s ecolabels. 
These ecolabels are instruments to promote the regulatory purposes of the standards on which they are based. Other labels are not based on regulatory standards, but nonetheless aim at steering consumer behaviour towards certain objectives. 
Thus tobacco labels pointing out to consumers the
dangers of smoking aim to promote healthier life styles and energy labels aim at reducing energy-consumption.
There exist, however, also labels (usually not ecolabels) that do indeed appear to aim primarily at consumer information without being linked to a regulatory purpose. Examples are the government mandated country of origin labels for meat products in the United States. The United States government points to consumer demand for country of origin information as the reason for the labelling scheme. If the provision of such information is costly and if consumers despite their valuing this information are not willing to pay for it, legislation that mandates labelling is one way to ensure that the information is being provided. Moreover legislation provides for a collective process to determine which information consumers desire to obtain in the first place.
From the foregoing two conclusions may be drawn that cast doubt on the depiction of labels as information tools facilitating informed consumer choice. First, many ecolabels aim at steering consumer behaviour towards a regulatory objective – often on the basis of standards created by governments, NGOs, or joint initiatives of business and civil society. Second, those labels which may correctly be depicted as mere information-tools frequently will require some collective and governmental intervention to come into existence. This will especially be the case if the information is not such that consumers are willing to pay for its provision.
Labels not only transmit selected information to consumers, they also present this information in a particular way. Behavioural economics, but also our own experiences as consumers, tell us that presentation or framing is key for the effects the respective information will have. Presentation influences whether consumers notice information, whether and how they process it. If as consumers we are given too much information, we may not be able to process it correctly within the short time we usually allocate to our daily consumption decisions.
We may also react irrationally to certain signals; thus health-conscious consumers have been found to choose candy bars with green labels over candy bars with red labels.
A recent study for the European Commission recommends that regulators should learn from marketing experts “how to effectively communicate information aimed at influencing consumers’ decisions.” This statement stands in stark contrast to the image of the consumer maximising his or her given preferences through an informed choice and rather evokes the image of a consumer steered or nudged by a label to make consumption decisions she did not previously know she wanted to make. On the middle ground between the fully informed consumer freely acting on the basis of given preferences and the consumer steered and nudged by marketing techniques and ‘choice architecture’ we may locate those consumers who have a preference, say for sustainable products without having a clear idea what it means for a product to be sustainable and who are happy to rely on others to make that judgment for them. 
Such consumers may look less for information but rather for a reliable evaluation that a certain product is ‘good’ or ‘sustainable.’ This intuition is supported by studies that find that labels with simple messages, such as ‘dolphin-safe,’ have indeed proven more effective in the sense of inducing changes in consumption than complex information-disclosure labels.
Given the multiplicity of labels (often based on private standards) there is the danger, not only of information overload, but also of consumer confusion and lack of consumer trust in labelling. As a consequence government involvement in labelling may be required in order to ensure that information provided by labels is correct and reliable, but also that labelled products indeed promote desirable goals. Governments may become active with respect to labelling by establishing guiding principles for labelling schemes, by prioritising or harmonising standards or by establishing their own labelling schemes and certification mechanisms.
Moreover, to avoid consumer confusion and to enhance the effectiveness of labelling governments may prohibit the use of labels competing with labels backed by government authority which is what the US did in its ‘dolphin-safe’ labelling scheme discussed below.
