Hematopoiesis is a tightly regulated process that leads
to the well-balanced production of myeloid, erythroid,
and lymphoid cells from a small number of highly proliferative  hematopoietic  stem  and  progenitor  cells
(HSCs and HPCs). During steady-state conditions,
hematopoiesis is controlled by the coordinated action
of a complex interplay of supporting growth factors
and the signals they deliver through hematopoietic
cytokine receptors expressed at the surface of HSPCs. 
These growth factors are produced in the bone
marrow (BM) microenvironment or at multiple sites
throughout the body from where they reach their target
cells in the BM via the bloodstream. Broadly acting
early cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-1, IL2, IL-3, IL-6,
and IL-11, enhance the initial stages of hematopoietic development and can be distinguished from more late-acting
hematopoietic differentiation-inducing cytokines like granulocyte colony-stimulatin
g factor (G-CSF), macrophage
colony-stimulating  factor  (M-CSF),  and  granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
Pattern recognition receptors like Toll-like receptors
(especially TLRs 4, 7, and 9) recognize conserved microbial products derived from exogenous pathogens.
Inflammatory conditions like bacterial or viral infections
increase the production and release of early- and lateacting hematopoietic cytokines, and these cytokines
contribute to the rapid replenishment of consumed
innate immune effector cells like granulocytes and
macrophages.Asaresult,earlyhematopoiesisinthe
BM is significantly skewed towards myeloid cell differentiation and output, leading to an increase of myeloid
colony-forming progenitor cells as well as granulocytes in
the circulation, a process that is described as emergency
myelopoiesis. In response to gram-negative infections, emergency myelopoiesis is mediated by 
TLR4-expressing non-hematopoietic cells, which sense systemic
lipopolysaccharide and by secreting myeloid cytokines
such as G-CSF, induce an adequate myelopoietic response
within the BM.
The involvement of different cytokines such as G-CSF,
GM-CSF, or IL-6 in regulating hematopoiesis during
steady states as well as during emergency situations has
been shown: respective knockout mice have defects both
in production and function of myelopoietic effector cells. 
However, alternative pathways are likely to exist
as mice with single or combined deficiencies for G-CSF,
GM-CSF, and IL-6 or G-CSF and GM-CSF are still able
to mount reactive myelopoietic responses during inflammatory conditions.
The goal of this study was the identification of novel
cytokines with yet unknown function in the hematopoietic
system. We therefore analyzed the BM of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- and vehicle-injected wild-type (WT) mice by
gene expression microarray. Among the known candidates, we identified angiopoietin-like 4 (Angptl4) as a
predominantly upregulated protein in the BM during
inflammatory conditions. Angptl4 has a broad range
of activities on hematopoi
esis acting both on early
hematopoietic progenitors as well as on immature
CD61+CD41low-expressing megakaryocytes (MKs). Furthermore, Angptl4 is a potent stimulator of megakaryopoiesis
after myelosuppressive therapy.
For the isolation of RNA, tissue samples were homogenized in TRIzol reagent using a bead beater homogenizer
(PEQLAB, Erlangen, Germany). All cell samples were
lysed in TRIzol reagent, and RNA was purified according
to the manufacturer s instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
USA). All RNA samples were subjected to DNAse I treatment. cDNA was synthesized using random hexamers primer and Superscript III reverse transcriptase according to
the manufacturer s instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). For all expression experiments, 100 ng cDNA each
was analyzed. Real-time PCR for Angptl4 and G-CSF
mRNA expression in the murine BM, liver, spleen, lung,
and bone marrow stromal cells, as well as PCR for friend
leukemia integration 1 (Fli-1), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), and nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2 (NF-E2) mRNA in MK cultures was
performed using a sequence detector (7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System; Invitrogen) and TaqMan target mixes
(Assay-on-Demand Gene expression reagents; Invitrogen).
Measurement of mouse G-CSF and Angptl4 was done in
serum of LPS vs. control mice according to the manufacturer s instructions (G-CSF, R&D Systems, Minneapolis,
MN, USA; Angptl4, USCN Life Science, USA). BM
plasma from the control and LPS-injected mice was prepared by flushing both femurs and tibia with 300 l of
cold PBS into Eppendorf-type centrifuge tubes. Cells/debris 
were removed by centrifugation at 3000 g for
10 min at 4  C; BM plasma was stored at -20  C. 
Control and LPS-stimulated bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs) at passage 1 were grown to confluence in a
T75 flask and kept for 48 h in 7 ml of Iscove s Modified
Dulbecco s Medium (IMDM) (GIBCO; Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 20 % FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 50 nM 2-mercaptoethanol 
(all reagents from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), antibiotics (GIBCO;
Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and with or
without LPS (10 g/ml) stimulation. Supernatants were
harvested, cleared by centrifugation, and passed through a0.45 m filter. Culture supernat
ants were analyzed for G-CSF and Angptl4.
To assess colony-forming unit (CFU) stimulation of
murine cytokines, freshly isolated mononuclear BM cells
(3   10^4) resuspended in IMDM and supplemented with
20 % FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 50 M 2-mercaptoethanol,
stem cell factor (SCF; 10 ng/ml), fms-related tyrosine
kinase 3 (FLT3; 10 ng/ml), and thrombopoietin (TPO;
50 ng/ml) were mixed with methylcellulose (Methocult
M3231,  2.6  %,  StemCell  Technologies,  Vancouver,
Canada) to yield a final concentration of 0.9 % methylcellulose. Additional factors were added in the following concentrations as indicated within the figure: IL-3
(20 ng/ml), GM-CSF (50 ng/ml), G-CSF (50 ng/ml), and
Angptl4 (50 ng/ml). For estimation of CFU frequency after
Angptl4 stimulation in vivo, 3 10^4 cells were plated
in methylcellulose mixed with IMDM (30 % FCS,
2mML-glutamine,50 M 2-mercaptoethanol) including the following factors: mIL-3 (10 ng/ml), hIL-6
(10 ng/ml), mSCF (10 ng/ml), mGM-CSF (10 ng/ml),
mTPO (50 ng/ml), and huEPO (2 U/ml) (all R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN, USA).
Six-  to  ten-week-old  female  B6.SJL-PtprcaPep3b/BoyJ
mice were lethally irradiated with 2   6.5 Gy in a 4-h interval and transplanted with 5   10^5
BM mononuclear cells
derived from syngeneic PBS, Angptl4, or non-injected
donor mice. All mice were maintained at the animal facility of the university clinic in Aachen, Germany. All animal
experiments were approved by the Federal Ministry for
Nature, Environment and Consumers 
Protection of the
state of North Rhine-Westphalia and were performed in
accordance to the respective national, federal, and institutional regulations.
For microarray and mRNA analysis, the mice were
injected once i.p. with 50 g LPS 
(1:1 mixture ofEscheri-chia  coli K12 andSalmonella  minnesota) 
and analyzed 8h later. For detection of BM plasma and blood serum
G-CSF and Angptl4 levels, the mice were injected twice
i.p. with 50 g LPS in a 48-h interval and analyzed 24 h
later. Murine recombinant Angptl4 (250
 g/kg bodyweight in 100 l PBS) was injected i.p. for five consecutive days, and the mice were analyzed 48 h later.
MKs were developed from lineage-depleted BM cells. Lin+
was depleted from mononuclear cells using a lineage cell
depletion kit (Miltenyi, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany)
according to the manufacturer s instructions. Lin-cells
were seeded at 1   10^5
cells per 1 ml in 48-well plates.
Cells were cultured in IMDM containing bovine serum
albumin, insulin, transferrin, SCF (25 ng/ml), and antibiotics.
Where indicated, Angptl4 (30 ng/ml), TPO (30 ng/ml),
or both were added. Cultures were performed at 37  C
in a fully humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. 
After5 days of culture, cells were subjected to flow cytometry
analysis using CD41 (eBioMWReg30) and CD61 (209.G3)
antibodies, or smear preparations were prepared using
cytospin and stained by the Wright-Giemsa method.
Cells were counted using flow cytometry and Flow-Count
fluorospheres (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). After
washing, harvested cells were resuspended in PBS containing 10 % FCS, 2 mM EDTA, and 7-aminoactinomycin D.
Immediately prior to analysis, 50 l of Flow-Count
fluorospheres were added. A
bsolute cell counts were
automatically  determined  using  a  Gallios  FACS
analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). The
system software calculated cell numbers using the
following formula: cells per microliter = [(viable cells
counted)/(fluorospheres  counted)]     fluorospheres/
microliter (see Additional file 1 for supplementary methods).