The first element in the debate about the future of Britishness is the changing ethnic composition of the British people themselves. 
The British are not a race, but a gathering of countless different races and communities, the vast majority of which were not indigenous to these islands.
In the pre-industrial era, when transport and communications were often easier by sea than by land, Britain was unusually open to external influence; first through foreign invasion, then, after Britain achieved naval supremacy, through commerce and imperial expansion. 
It is not their purity that makes the British unique, but the sheer pluralism of their ancestry.
London was first established as the capital of a Celtic Britain by Romans from Italy. They were in turn driven out by Saxons and Angles from Germany. 
The great cathedrals of this land were built mostly by Norman Bishops, but the religion practised in them was secured by the succession of a Dutch Prince. 
Outside our Parliament, Richard the Lionheart proudly sits astride his steed. 
A symbol of British courage and defiance. 
Yet he spoke French much of his life and depended on the Jewish community of England to put up the ransom that freed him from prison.
The idea that Britain was a pure Anglo-Saxon society before the arrival of communities from the Caribbean, Asia and Africa is fantasy. 
But if this view of British identity is false to our past, it is false to our future too. 
The global era has produced population movements of a breadth and richness without parallel in history.
Today's London is a perfect hub of the globe. 
It is home to over 30 ethnic communities of at least 10,000 residents each. 
In this city tonight, over 300 languages will be spoken by families over their evening meal at home.
This pluralism is not a burden we must reluctantly accept. 
It is an immense asset that contributes to the cultural and economic vitality of our nation.
Legitimate immigration is the necessary and unavoidable result of economic success, which generates a demand for labour faster than can be met by the birth-rate of a modern developed country. 
Every country needs firm but fair immigration laws. There is no more evil business than trafficking in human beings and nothing corrodes social cohesion worse than a furtive underground of illegal migrants beyond legal protection against exploitation. 
But we must also create an open and inclusive society that welcomes incomers for their contribution to our growth and prosperity. 
Our measures to attract specialists in information technology is a good example.
Our cultural diversity is one of the reasons why Britain continues to be the preferred location for multinational companies setting up in Europe. 
The national airline of a major European country has recently relocated its booking operation to London precisely because of the linguistic variety of the staff whom it can recruit here.
And it isn`t just our economy that has been enriched by the arrival of new communities. Our lifestyles and cultural horizons have also been broadened in the process. 
This point is perhaps more readily understood by young Britons, who are more open to new influences and more likely to have been educated in a multi-ethnic environment. 
But it reaches into every aspect of our national life.
Chicken Tikka Massala is now a true British national dish, not only because it is the most popular, but because it is a perfect illustration of the way Britain absorbs and adapts external influences. 
Chicken Tikka is an Indian dish. The Massala sauce was added to satisfy the desire of British people to have their meat served in gravy.
Coming to terms with multiculturalism as a positive force for our economy and society will have significant implications for our understanding of Britishness.